Brian, Ryan, and Diane Learn About Opportunity Cost

Brian, Ryan, and Diane are triplets. They each get an allowance of $10 each month.
Their parents are planning on a big vacation to Florida in August. The triplets are
planning to save their allowances until then so they will have spending money on
vacation. Right now, they are spending Christmas break with their grandma. Their
grandma has suggested that they give her their allowances for safekeeping until the trip.
She agreed to pay them 20% per month interest on their allowances for eight months.
They will not be able to get any of their money back from their grandma until vacation
time after they begin "depositing" it with her. She has left it up to each of the triplets to
decide what to do with the interest.
A common decision people must make is how to invest their money. Depositing
money in a savings account is a common financial decision. There are two main types of
savings accounts. Some accounts earn simple interest. These accounts pay the interest
earned to the account depositor who can use the money right away for needs or wants.
Some accounts earn compound interest. These accounts leave the interest earned in the
account. The depositor will then earn interest on the interest, which is called
compounding. The interest earned is called compound interest.
As usual, each of the triplets wants to do things a little differently. Brian wants his grandma to give him the
interest each month so that he can have a little spending money until August. By August, he will have $80 saved
for vacation. He will have $72 to spend between now and August. His money will earn simple interest. In August,
his account will have the sum of his deposits and nothing more.
Ryan wants Grandma to give him the interest each month just in case he needs money for something. He
doesn't really plan to spend the money. He plans to save it in his penny bank until vacation. If he sticks to his plan
and saves all his interest money, by vacation time he will have $152 to spend. This includes $80 from deposits
and $72 interest saved in his penny bank.
Diane wants Grandma to keep her interest as well as her allowance. She will receive compound interest, or
interest paid on the interest plus savings. By August, Diane will have $199 for the trip. This total includes $80
from deposits and a whopping $119 from compounded interest!
Making good financial decisions will help you make the most of your savings. While Brian will have spending
money each month, he is giving up compounded interest that his money might have earned if he had left it in his
account. His opportunity cost, the cost of choosing to spend his interest instead of investing it, was $119 in lost
spending money for the vacation. The trade-off between simple interest and compound interest is whether you
need to spend the interest earned right away versus the growth in savings you will have later if you leave the
interest to compound.
Ryan wants to have his interest money available to spend "just in case." Sometimes emergencies do come up,
and we need to have money to pay for them. But Ryan's opportunity cost, even if he saves his interest and doesn't
spend it, is $47 in income he might have received if he had let his interest compound. The opportunity cost of
using a simple interest account is the lost benefits that can be obtained from the next best choice - compounding.
Diane receives the most money in interest. Her opportunity cost, however, was the loss of available spending
money for eight months for emergencies or other wants. Whenever people or businesses make choices or
trade-offs about their money, they must consider the opportunity cost of their decisions. People should compare
their costs to the benefits before they make any trade-offs.
For example, a choice many people have to make is whether to go to college or get a job right out of high
school. If you choose to go to college, the opportunity cost is the money you would have earned if you had
worked instead. On the other hand, after earning a college degree, your yearly earnings will be much greater than
if you only had a high school diploma. The trade-off is giving up earnings now for a greater amount of earnings
later.
Sometimes people or businesses can afford to leave money in the bank to earn compound interest. Compound
interest certainly adds up! But most people need to have available money for emergencies. That's why people
often have more than one savings account. They can set aside some money that will be available for emergency
spending. In another account, they can invest money and leave it alone to compound. That is wise investing!